TITLE: On Leaving the RISC-V Foundation
--------
I recently decided to resign from my posts at the RISC-V foundation.
This may seem somewhat abrupt, but it's something I've been considering
for at least a year now.  It's just generally a bit awkward to discuss
these sorts of things publicly before making a decision so a lot of
people have been out of the loop.  This shouldn't be an immediate cause
of worry for anyone, as I have very little to do with the RISC-V
foundation, but as I do some work on the software stack I thought it
would be worth writing up a short description of my thoughts so
everyone is on the same page.

RISC-V is obviously in bad shape.  That's a big part of why I'm leaving.
I've seen ISAs die before, I'm sure many of you have as well, and we're
clearly quite a way down that path.  The interesting question is: why?

Over my years of working with RISC-V I've had many people describe,
sometimes in great detail, reasons why the ISA won't work out.  I
generally interact with engineers, so as a result most of these issues
have the same flavor: a specific issue that we need to fix now because,
based on prior experience, kicking the can down the road will cause
larger issues in the future.  The exact form of these issues has changed
over time.  Early in the RISC-V development process there were worries
about which instructions we'd chosen to support or how we'd partitioned
the machine's state.  As the RISC-V community grew we started to get
higher-level concerns, like missing an interrupt controller or a boot
process.  These days we've graduated to very abstract concerns, like the
lack of adoption and a lack of growth in the software ecosystem.

While I don't think any of these concerns are themselves invalid, they
are really missing the point.  We remember these issues because we had
to fix them in order to make some product work, but we only bothered
fixing them because there was some product that would have otherwise not
been viable.  Engineering doesn't exist in a vacuum, the first order
constraint for determining a viable set of solutions to any problem is
the end product.  Unfortunately, the approach that the RISC-V foundation
has taken just doesn't address reality.  Partitioning all of computing
into a set of three-word problems and trying to fix each individually
without an underlying design simply leads to nonsense -- it's impossible
to even agree upon a definition of the problem, much less evaluate
proposed solutions.  As a result the specifications drag on long past
their deadlines, eventually morphing themselves into meta-specifications
in an attempt to meet everyone's demands.

The result of this stagnation in at the RISC-V foundation is
fragmentation in the RISC-V ecosystem.  The various RISC-V based systems
currently available might share a common heritage, but there isn't even
a single RISC-V ISA document that describes legal behavior for the two
commercially available RISC-V cores today.  While the differences today
are small (things only machine-mode software would notice), as RISC-V
based systems move from prototypes to products we're starting to run
into more visible problems (the plethora of data parallel ISAs, for
example).  There will always be a degree of ecosystem fragmentation
around RISC-V, as that's just the nature of an open standard.  The issue
is finding a way to make sure that progress is made within the shared
base of the ecosystem at least as fast as it is outside the shared
ecosystem, and I just don't see that happening now or in the near future
with the approach that the RISC-V foundation is currently taking.

At a bare minimum we're going to have a degree of short-term
fragmentation within the RISC-V ecosystem.  Obviously I hope we can keep
that from getting out of control, but I'd rather spend my side working
on the software side of things than the foundation side of things.
